docs: edits to metrics-operator architecture page (#1679)
keptn/lifecycle-toolkit: docs/content/en/docs/concepts/architecture/components/metrics-operator/_index.md

---

The Keptn Metrics Operator collects, processes,
and analyzes metrics data from a variety of sources.
Once collected, this data can be used
to generate a variety of reports and dashboards
that provide insights into the health and performance
of the application and infrastructure.

While Kubernetes has ways to extend its metrics APIs, they have limitations,
especially that they only allow you to use a single observability platform
such as Prometheus, Dynatrace or Datadog.
The Keptn Metrics Operator solves this problem
by providing a single entry point for
all your metrics data, regardless of its source,
so you can use multiple instances of multiple observability platforms.

Keptn metrics are integrated with the Kubernetes
[Custom Metrics API](https://github.com/kubernetes/metrics#custom-metrics-api)

> so are compatible with the Kubernetes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so they are compatible with the Kubernetes
```

---

The Keptn Metrics Operator collects, processes,
and analyzes metrics data from a variety of sources.

> Once collected, this data, can be used

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once collected, this data can be used
```

to generate a variety of reports and dashboards
that provide insights into the health and performance
of the application and infrastructure.

> While Kubernetes does have two metrics servers, they have limitations,

Reviewer 3: The server is a single one, but it offers two extension points

```suggestion
While Kubernetes does have two ways to extend the metric API server, they have limitations,
```

> While Kubernetes does have ways to extend its metrics APIs, they have limitations,
> especially that they
> only allow you to use a single observability platform

Author: ```suggestion
While Kubernetes has ways to extend its metrics APIs, they have limitations,
especially that they only allow you to use a single observability platform
```

> While Kubernetes does have two ways to extend the metric API server, they have limitations,
> especially that their custom and external APIs
> only allow you to use a single instance of a single observability platform

Reviewer 4: I would not go into so much detail here, especially cus the info is not 100% correct.
```suggestion
While Kubernetes does have ways to extend its metrics APIs, they have limitations,
especially that they
only allow you to use a single observability platform
```

such as Prometheus, Dynatrace or Datadog.
The Keptn Metrics Operator solves this problem
by providing a single entry point for
all your metrics data, regardless of its source,
so you can use multiple instances of multiple observability platforms.

Keptn metrics are integrated with the Kubernetes

> [Custom Metrics API](https://github.com/kubernetes/design-proposals-archive/blob/main/instrumentation/custom-metrics-api.md)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[Custom Metrics API](https://github.com/kubernetes/metrics#custom-metrics-api)
```

The controller reconciles a [`KeptnMetric`](../../../../yaml-crd-ref/metric.md)
CR and updates its status with the metric value
provided by the selected metric provider.
Each `KeptnMetric` is identified by `name`
and is associated with an instance of an observability platform
that is defined in a
[KeptnMetricsProvider](../../../../yaml-crd-ref/metricsprovider.md)
CR.

The steps in which the controller fetches metrics are given below:

1. Fetch the `KeptnMetric` object to be reconciled.
   * If the object is not found,
     it returns and lets Kubernetes handle deleting all associated resources.
1. If the object is found, the code checks
   whether the metric has been updated within the interval
   that is defined in the `spec.fetchintervalseconds` field.
   * If not, it skips reconciling and requeues the request for later.
1. If the metric should be reconciled,
   it fetches the provider defined in the `spec.provider.name` field.
   * If the provider is not found,
     it returns and requeues the request for later.
1. If the provider is found,
   it loads the provider and evaluates the query
   defined in the `spec.query` field.
1. If the evaluation is successful,

>    it stores the fetched value in the status of the `KeptnMetric` object.

Reviewer: if the evaluation fails the error and reason will also be there

Reviewer: properties:
              errMsg:
                description: ErrMsg represents the error details when the query could
                  not be evaluated
                type: string
              lastUpdated:
                description: LastUpdated represents the time when the status data
                  was last updated
                format: date-time
                type: string
              rawValue:
                description: RawValue represents the resulting value in raw format
                format: byte
                type: string

Author: I added this information but it's not clear to me how to view this information.  I slogged through the autogenerated CRD/API info and I find a bit of "MetricStatus" stuff for autoscaling under ListMeta but nothing that really lines up here.  And how does one inspect this metric status data?  Does one use the standard way of inspecting a resource?

Author: https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/pull/1807 adds KeptnMetricStatus resource and other status resources to the API ref and that clarifies everything!  I am updating the arch piece to reference that resource.

1. Fetch the `KeptnMetric` object to be reconciled.
   * If the object is not found,
     it returns and lets Kubernetes handle deleting all associated resources.
1. If the object is found, the code checks
   whether the metric has been updated within the interval
   that is defined in the `spec.fetchintervalseconds` field.
   * If not, it skips reconciling and requeues the request for later.
1. If the metric should be reconciled,
   it fetches the provider defined in the `spec.provider.name` field.
   * If the provider is not found,
     it returns and requeues the request for later.
1. If the provider is found,
   it loads the provider and evaluates the query
   defined in the `spec.query` field.
1. If the evaluation is successful,
   it stores the fetched value
   in the metric status field of the `KeptnMetric` object.
1. If the evaluation fails,
   the error and reason is also provided in the
   [MetricStatus](../../../../crd-ref/metrics/v1alpha3/#keptnmetricstatus)
   resource.
   The error is described in human-readable language
   and as raw data to help identify the source of the problem
   (such as a forbidden code).

> 

Reviewer 5: I don't think we need to explain step-by-step here how the controller works. If we in the future change something, this will be out-of-sync and if the user wants to know exactly how the controller works he should check the code. I would go here with some general description what the controller does instead of step-by-step description.

Author: But isn't the point of an architecture doc to explain exactly how something works?  And yes, this does mean that we may need to update the docs as the product changes.  What does everyone else think?

Reviewer: Maybe we can have a slightly more generic description?  

When a new KeptnMetric` is found the controller checks whether the metric has been updated within the interval
  that is defined in the `spec.fetchintervalseconds` field. If not, it skips reconciling and requeues the request for later.
Otherwise it attempts to fetch the provider defined in the `spec.provider.name` field.
It queries the provider with the query defined in the `spec.query` field, than evaluates the result.
If the evaluation is successful, it stores the fetched value in the metric status field of the `KeptnMetric` object.
If the evaluation fails, the error and reason is also provided in the
   [MetricStatus](../../../../crd-ref/metrics/v1alpha3/#keptnmetricstatus)
   resource. The error is described in human-readable language and as raw data to help identify the source of the problem (such as a forbidden code).

Reviewer: @odubajDT I think this is generic enough, no? @StackScribe would it be an ok level of detail?

Author: done, I think.  Check it out.

   The `MetricStatus` resource includes the following information:

   ```yaml
   properties:
     errMsg:
       description: provides error details if the query could not be evaluated
       type: string
     lastUpdated:
       description: time when the status data was last updated
       format: date-time
       type: string
     rawValue:
       description: shows the resulting value, in raw format
       format: byte

>        type: string

Reviewer 5: `value` field is missing here in the properties list

Author: I added it.  Not sure what to use as the value of format -- is it "byte" to match rawValue or is it not specified as for errMsg?  Also, I notice that the properties listed here are in a different order than what shows in the API ref.  Should I reorder this list to match the API ref or does it not matter?

Author: I added `value` field but wasn't sure what to use for `format` -- should it be `byte` like `rawValue` or is it not specified like `errMsg`?  Also I notice that the `properties` here are listed in a different order than in the API ref.  Should I reorder this list to match the API ref or does it not matter?

Author: done

   * If the provider is not found,
     it returns and requeues the request for later.
1. If the provider is found,
   it loads the provider and evaluates the query
   defined in the `spec.query` field.
1. If the evaluation is successful,
   it stores the fetched value
   in the metric status field of the `KeptnMetric` object.
1. If the evaluation fails,
   the error and reason is also provided in the metric status.
   The result is also stored as a raw value
   so that, if we get something unexpected
   (such as a forbidden code),
   the user can also view it there.

   The metric status field includes the following information:

   ```yaml
   properties:
         errMsg:
           description: ErrMsg provides the error details
                        if the query could not be evaluated
           type: string
         lastUpdated:
           description: LastUpdated shows the time
                        when the status data was last updated
           format: date-time
           type: string
         rawValue:
           description: RawValue shows the resulting value, in raw format
           format: byte
           type: string

>    ```

Reviewer 4: every indentation level should be 2 spaces

   * If the object is not found,
     it returns and lets Kubernetes handle deleting all associated resources.
1. If the object is found, the code checks
   whether the metric has been updated within the interval
   that is defined in the `spec.fetchintervalseconds` field.
   * If not, it skips reconciling and requeues the request for later.
1. If the metric should be reconciled,
   it fetches the provider defined in the `spec.provider.name` field.
   * If the provider is not found,
     it returns and requeues the request for later.
1. If the provider is found,
   it loads the provider and evaluates the query
   defined in the `spec.query` field.
1. If the evaluation is successful,
   it stores the fetched value
   in the metric status field of the `KeptnMetric` object.
1. If the evaluation fails,
   the error and reason is also provided in the
   [MetricStatus](../../../../crd-ref/metrics/v1alpha3/#keptnmetricstatus)
   resource.
   The error is described in human-readable language
   and as raw data to help identify the source of the problem
   (such as a forbidden code).

   The `MetricStatus` resource includes the following information:

>    ```yaml

Author: Removed from this doc but added to the KeptnMetric manifest reference page.

style Metrics-Controller fill:#d8e6f4,stroke:#fff,stroke-width:px,color:#006bb8
```

The **Metrics adapter** exposes custom metrics from an application
to external monitoring and alerting tools.
The adapter exposes custom metrics on a specific endpoint
where external monitoring and alerting tools can scrape them.
It is an important component of the metrics operator
as it allows for the collection and exposure of custom metrics,
which can be used to gain insight into the behavior and performance
of applications running on a Kubenetes cluster.

> The **Metrics controller** fetches metrics from a SLI provider.

Reviewer 6: `an` SLI provider

> The **Metrics controller** fetches metrics from a SLI provider.

Author: ```suggestion
The **Metrics controller** fetches metrics from an SLI provider.
```

The steps in which the controller fetches metrics are given below:

1. When a [`KeptnMetric`](../../../../yaml-crd-ref/metric.md)
   resource is found or modified,
   the controller checks whether the metric has been updated
   within the interval that is defined in the `spec.fetchintervalseconds` field.

>    * If not, it skips the reconcilliation process

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   * If not, it skips the reconciliation process
```

     and queues the request for later.

1. The controller attempts to fetch the provider defined in the
   `spec.provider.name` field.
   * If this is not possible, the controller reconciles
     and queues the request for later.

1. If the provider is found,
   the controller loads the provider and evaluates the query
   defined in the `spec.query` field.
   * If the evaluation is successful,
     it stores the fetched value

>      in the `KeptnMetricStatus` field of the `KeptnMetric` object.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     in the `status` field of the `KeptnMetric` object.
```
